No, I've got, uh, Michael Ford, who's Michael two here.
He's, um, just needs to, uh, turn on his microphone
and camera by the looks of it.
He's there. Is he? Stop checking.
I can see him on the panel. There we go.
Uh, nice to see. Michael.
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Mr.
Chairman and, um, apologies for the technical hitch.
Okay. I think we've only got one microphone going there.
If we've got two and it starts giving us feedback,
we'll let you know, but Okay.
Um, we, we've got your submission.
You can take the submission as read.
Anything you'd like to highlight, please do.
Um, I'll give you a call with about four minutes
to go just in terms of, uh, uh, some question time,
but, um, over to you.
Cool. Yeah, thanks very much.
And thank you for the opportunity to speak to, uh,
local government New Zealand's submission on the building,
earthquake Prone Buildings Amendment Act.
Uh, my name's Michael Ford.
I'm mayor of Manawa two, uh,
and I've had a particular interest in earthquake prone
building legislation for a long time,
and had a lead role with LG NZ on this.
And with me, I have William Blacker,
who is a senior policy advisor on LG NZ,
and can take you through some of the key points in our,
uh, our submission.
William.
Thanks Michael. Um, so local government is,
is strongly supportive of this, uh, legislation.
Um, councils are deeply enmeshed in the regime, uh,
both directly through their statutory responsibilities
to administer it and property they own.
Somebody needs to mute. So are you both in the same room?
No, No. Separate room.
Okay. Somebody else, somewhere
is, we're getting a lot of feedback.
They're probably getting from each
other. No, they're in separate rooms.
We're in separate. I'm in field and he's in Wellington.
Can Michael, can you, while when you're talking,
can you put yourself on mute
and we'll see if that helps. Right. Okay.
How's that? Better much? That's much better for it.
Excellent. Um, I'll just start from the top.
Uh, local government is strongly supportive
of this, uh, legislation.
Uh, councils are deeply enmeshed in the seismic
strengthening regime, um, both directly through their
statutory responsibilities to administer it
and the property they own, and indirectly
through their interest in ensuring towns
and cities remain, uh, safe, vibrant,
and economically strong.
Um, LDNZ has long been an advocate for change
to the Seic strengthening regime.
Um, as I said, we're, we're strongly supportive,
but we believe a few small changes could improve this, uh,
legislation further, um, including retaining buildings
that are vital during emergencies, such as hospitals,
fire stations, and emergency shelters within the definition
of a priority building, uh, providing some extra allowance
to the identification of, uh, new earthquake prime buildings
after the initial identification period.
Um, and more thinking
and greater clarity around defining thorough affairs
of high vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
Um, we also think that some other steps can be taken
to compliment the positive effects this legislation will
have on revitalizing the CVDs of our towns
and cities, uh, such as giving councils greater ability
to remediate derelict buildings
or financial incentives for remedial work.
Um, Manou
and in particular, fielding is a
particular interest in this reform.
And I'll hand over to Michael to briefly talk about
what this legislation means for his council.
Thank you. And if you can pop yourself on mute while
Michael's speaking, I'm great.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you Will. Um, so Field Fielding is a town with
about 66 earthquake prone buildings, 28 in priority,
uh, phis.
We've strengthened 12 buildings,
which I guess you'd call the low low hanging fruit.
Um, what would be helpful
for us would be some standard templates would be useful
for securing facades.
So a standard template
for a single story unreinforced masonry building, similar
for two story corner buildings, et cetera.
Um, we would also like interpretation
of the word sufficient when it comes to sufficient vehicle
or pedestrian traffic to warrant prioriti prioritization.
So there aren't any actual thresholds in terms
of pedestrian counts or traffic counts.
So we have the, we have priority thorough affairs
with half the timeframe, uh, that compared
to other towns with without priority thorough affairs.
Uh, thanks to a previous council decision.
Um, I will be speaking on Monday
to our council submission,
but we would like some, um, I guess some evenness
and timeframes, uh, for those.
We, we are a town that has probably got a smaller town
center, even though we have a population of 18,000, uh,
we've probably got a smaller town center than some
with populations of under 10,000, partly
because of our proximity to Palmers to North.
And we're not on a major state highway.
So I'll stop there and, um,
we can be available for questions.
So you're, you're done too, Michael? Uh, William, sorry.
Yep. All good. Right. Okay. Questions, colleagues.
I'll just repeat, I'll just pass. Okay.
Hi, William. Good morning.
Uh, Michael, I have a question, um, around the Heritage
New Zealand submission.
I'm wondering if you've read it, um, particularly
where it says, um, they recommend
that Heritage New Zealand is consulted when deciding on
appropriate work and
before territorial authorities apply to district court
for an order, uh, authorizing work.
And that's where owners have failed to take action
or are unable to take action, including demolition.
So, uh, do you have a view on Heritage New Zealand's request
to be consulted on these matters?
Uh, I haven't read the submission.
Um, to be honest, I don't have a particularly strong view of
that off the top of my head.
I'm not sure it's anything I've discussed internally
or with, um, any of our members, uh, in particular
detail, to be honest.
Um, Michael, I'm not sure if you've got any particularly
strong views on that.
Um, I haven't read the submission.
Um, I guess I'd be, my, my first reaction would be
to be opposed to that.
Yeah. Okay. Um, thanks, that's really helpful.
Um, the second one is that Heritage New Zealand are
suggesting that, um, incentives
and expanded funding mechanisms be enhanced
to support owners to undertake seismic strengthening.
Uh, I'm wondering, where do you, do you have a view, uh,
as local government, New Zealand, uh, on, on where
that funding should come from?
Uh, given that, uh, heritage is highly subjective
and, you know, wouldn't it, uh, I mean,
there is some suggestion that those who seek
to protect it should also be responsible
for funding its protection if they really, uh,
wanna protect those, the,
those things they find so valuable.
Do you have a view on who should pay?
Uh, well, I know that, I mean,
right now I think a lot of councils would probably say that
that would not be the highest priority right now,
when you're looking at the sort of funding environment
for local government and,
and the prospect of rates capping coming in, I would say,
um, even though some councils probably do value
that reasonably highly, and I'm sure,
and I know a lot of, uh, communities do, um, I think
it would be a tough ask to ask rate payers for
to stump up for a lot of that.
Um, given the huge pressure that, um,
councils are facing at the moment, um, I think,
uh, you know, we'd always welcome central government support
for that, for councils.
Um, I take your point on the fact that, um, those
who value it should, should be in a, in a, um, uh, required
to, I suppose, uh, um, foot some of the, uh,
responsibility for paying for it.
And I know that that's, um, uh, what the proposed, uh,
regulatory relief, uh, regime will be doing.
Um, we've got our own thoughts on, on that regime.
Um, and you'll probably hear them in our submission on the
planning bill environment Bill on, uh, Monday.
I look forward to reading it. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, other questions, colleagues? Elia? Yeah,
Thank you. Um,
silly white brown here.
I was interested in your views on the phrase as soon
as practicable
after, I think it was July, 2027, um,
whether you felt this was, um, sufficiently,
um, precise or whether you would prefer a
deadline to have to get this done.
And also, while I understand that
you, from your comments
and your submission that in the long run, the costs
for everybody will reduce
because of this in the short run, is, is this not extra
extra work that councils will have to do
that's not been funded?
We've got a problem. Mm-hmm.
Sorry, I just missed the end of that
because of the feedback, uh, we were getting.
Um, I can, on on the first point though.
I, my my impression is that it,
it varies quite significantly in terms of the,
the remediation timeframes.
It's, it's probably a matter
where some discretion from, from council
to council is probably warranted.
Um, there'll be, I imagine there's a vast difference in the,
in the ability of different communities to be able to get
that work over the line based on, you know, the, the amount
of capital that's, um, swirling around on given community
and, and the amount of
buildings that are, that are in place.
But, um, I don't know.
Michael has, might have some thoughts on that. Um,
Look, I, I didn't hear the question. I'm sorry.
Nevermind. I think, look, you've got the chance
of asking some questions again on Monday,
and I think hopefully we might have the technical, uh,
situation somewhat, uh, picked happen.
We've got it at the moment. Um, but Michael
and William really appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Thank you for
Thank you. Appreciate it.
Thank you. Okay.
I dunno where, which end is the feedback at our end?
No, it's on their end, so it end okay. Right. Okay.
We've got sent New Zealand Limited who are also on Zoom,
Just bringing through.
We think they are
Right. Cool.
We, we are still morning, aren't we?
Yeah, we're just, okay. Good morning. Um, welcome.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
You can take your submission as read, um,
but if you want to highlight
any elements of that, that's great.
Um, I will give you a call with about four minutes
to go if you're still presenting at that point in time, just
so we can allow some time for questions.
But if you want to introduce yourselves and, um,
and speak to the suspicion would be great.
Do we, on our screen, we can only see our office have,
we've got Dan Swanson office send group also on the line.
Ah, we've got other people on the line.
No, we don't have anyone else. No, no.
Just you at the moment.
Oh, okay. Oh, well I can, I can talk to that.
So, um, my name from Rumo Bay, we,
the lawyers acting for Center group.
So, um, we had anticipated that, uh, Dane, uh, would join
to sort of talk to who sending roof out,
but I can introduce them.
So, uh, they're the, the owner
and, um, manager of 42 of,
of the 42 Westfield Shopping Centers in
Australia and New Zealand.
The New Zealand portfolio is, uh, five, five assets, four
of which are in Auckland
and one in Christchurch with a combined value
of $2.8 billion.
Uh, and they're co-owned between Center Group
and GIC, which is the Singaporean based, uh,
sovereign wealth fund.
Uh, they have, uh, 900 tenants
and, uh, annually 44 million customer visits.
Um, and have also made the comment in relation to this,
uh, this law change that having talked to peer investors,
the existing seismic regulations have been a,
a significant hand break on attracting foreign investment
into property, uh, and,
and retaining it, um, in New Zealand.
Uh, and the, there was a, uh, the committee may be aware
of the recent sale process that was gone through
for GIC looking to sell out of its interest.
And the, um, uh, uh, feedback through that process was
that the existing seismic regime and,
and the uncertainty around further investment required and,
and the long time for returns to be enjoyed from
that investment, uh, was off-putting
for foreign investors considering the acquisition.
So in terms of our, um, the submission generally, uh,
you said there is very supportive of, of the bill, uh,
in particular the implementation
of proportionate risk-based regulatory approach.
The division of New Zealand into low, medium,
and high seismic zones, including the classification
of Auckland as a low seismic zone, uh,
and the removal of buildings in low seismic zones from both
the operation of the seismic regime in the ACT
and from the existing of great prone buildings,
register is welcomed.
Uh, Auckland of course represents a high proportion
by both value
and number of commercial properties in New Zealand.
And so this stands to benefit a very significant part
of the investment community.
Uh, we also, um, support the idea
of identifying priority buildings based on the risk
that they may cause to people
or property using public roads for paths and thoroughfares.
Uh, we we're very supportive of the removal
of the MBS rating system, which we see
as having created false perceptions
regarding building vulnerable vulnerabilities, uh, and,
and ambiguity as to what is to consider to be safe.
Uh, finally, we're also very pleased
to have seen the more recent, um, health
and safety at work Amendment bill, which deals
with the interface between the Building Act.
And, uh, that's been, uh, that that interface
or the lack of interface under the existing regime has been
of significant concern to owners
and occupiers as they have sought to navigate
what compliance with the building act means in the context
of compliance with their hazard or obligations,
and that bill deals to that issue.
We do have a few comments though on the effectiveness
of the, um, of, of the bill as currently drafted,
that the first is to note that the EPB methodology, um,
it will be critical to the effective implementation
of, of the act.
Whilst the ACT applies to a, a much narrowed class
of buildings, uh, that are within the scope of the act, many
of them are anchored to descriptors, such as,
as explained in the EPB methodology
and to determinations made in accordance
with the EPB methodology.
So for the regime to work well, DPB methodology will need
to be clear and comprehensive so that owners occupies
and councils can determine with certainty
where the buildings fall within, uh, as
to whether any particular building is a building within
scope for the purposes of, of the act.
And we'd like to see that expressly
provided for in the bill with, um, wording along the lines
of that the EPB methodology must be expressed in clear
accessible language with unambiguous criteria
that territorial authorities can apply consistently
and that owners and occupiers can understand.
It would also be super important
for everybody who's involved to know whether a building, um,
that whether a building is within scope
or not will not change over time.
And so we are concerned to know that the changes
to EPP methodology will not be frequent, uh,
nor made without due process.
Many of the issues with the current seismic regime have
occurred as a result to changes in the engineering
assessment or the basis on which the engineering
assessments have been undertaken.
Uh, and those have resulted in buildings which were
not earthquake prone,
or which were seismically compliant at whatever level was
sought, uh, then no longer being seismically compliant
and requiring either further investment
or significantly undermining the value of the investment
that had previously been made.
So we think, um, this could be dealt with,
with having a sort of minimum review period, say 10 years,
so that parties have certainty
that the law won't change within that time.
Uh, and a and a suitable process around any amendment
to the EPV methodology.
Uh, that would be along the lines of, uh, the method, the,
the process which is proposed for the initial methodology.
The other point which we'd like to raise is in the context
of, um, there are a number of, of aspects of the bill,
which apply to, uh, buildings, which are described
as being at least three stories high.
While we see that as being easy to interpret for apartment
and office buildings, there are multiple other buildings
where it is less clear that might include cinemas,
bulk retail and, and similar source buildings warehouses.
Uh, and we think to be clear on whether those buildings are
within or without the scope, uh, is essential
Also. We've got four minutes left.
Uh, that's the end of my comments
and we're available for questions.
Right. Perfect. Tell, um, I'll, I'll start, I'll start
with the last one of those items, which is the, um,
the, the focus on stories.
Um, we particularly had that with, um, with churches,
which often, you know, single story buildings, but
but often quite high, um, natives in particular.
Um, would it be better for us to be saying stories
or a, a given height limit?
If you're over that height limit,
you're considered to be more than three story.
If you're under that height limit,
you're consider to be less.
Yeah. Um, possibly though the risk is obviously different
from somebody who, if, if you're on the third story of a,
an apartment building, um, it's, it sort
of has a different risk profile to being inside a, uh,
a three story bulk retail building, for example.
So I, I think we, it, it may be the,
the stories are appropriate for some buildings and a
and a different measure for others,
but sort of also embracing the sort
of risk based proportionality that it might not be
that the height of a bulk retail building simply
because it's the same height it's a three story office,
is necessarily problematic.
Can you, can you just tell us also
what you know about the, the frequency with which those kind
of buildings you like bulk retail, whatever, uh,
type buildings are deemed,
currently deemed earthquake prone,
and also how difficult it is to, um, remediate
that, remediate them?
Yeah. These are vis-a-vis much more complicated
building with, you know, with, um,
interim stories and so on.
Yes, of course. Look, my understanding in terms
of in general the industrial stock, uh,
and bulk retail, there haven't been significant issues
through that, particularly in the more modern stock.
Uh, I think it would be different for say,
large format cinemas.
Uh, and I'm aware that some large format cinemas,
particularly where they're integrated into other buildings,
have, have been, um,
problematic from a seismic assessment perspective.
And also the significant remedial works
that are, are required.
It probably being the case
that those buildings are more frequently concrete, whereas,
um, you sort of bulk retail
and warehousing is typically metal framed.
Yep. Okay. No, that's reasonably clear.
Um, other questions, colleagues, Simon, it's really
Helpful. Yep. And, um,
certainly submission that we expect officials
to take, um, to take seriously.
Okay. I think, I think we're good.
So really appreciate it. That's great.
Many thanks for the opportunity to present.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Right, next Iona, nice to see you again.
Iona is one of my longtime former colleagues
and always had a big interest in heritage
and seismic strength.
So, Iona in your hands, we've got, we've,
'cause you're an individual, we've only got you down
for five minutes, so, um, but if, if there's anything
that you want to leave us with in terms
of documentation, that's helpful too.
'cause I know you said that you hadn't had time to,
to write it up in, in advance.
But,
Uh, Koto, thank you very much for hearing me today.
And I want to also acknowledge, um, former mayor Wade Brown
as well, two of my colleagues,
former colleagues already on this committee.
Um, I'd also like to thank Minister Pink
for his excellent leadership, um, and the work of officials.
Um, this issue is obviously highly challenging.
Even the wisdom of Solomon would not suffice in my view.
Um, I, my expertise is that I was one
of the most involved locally elected members
around the country advocating
for change in supporting constituents for over 10 years.
And so I haven't made a particular stance on the bill.
I just want to add a few comments,
which I hope will be helpful.
So first of all, we've got some major structural problems.
We've got a small population geographically isolated,
relatively low average, um, incomes
for a first world country and a high level of hazards.
So affording any change is highly problematic.
I am a little bit concerned
that it's really only taken seven years to do, uh,
a fundamental rethink of this world leading policy
and legislation stability is
absolutely critical in this space.
We can't have too many policy swings, uh, going from, uh,
try, um, going from parliamentary
term to parliamentary term.
Um, I have advocated long for further funding for owners
who, um, own earthquake prime buildings or apartments.
Both labor and national have done
some excellent work in the past.
Um, but these methods do need
to be put back in like the heritage equip fund loans, um,
and even just money to secure parapets and fast facades.
Um, I, I do believe, while this isn't in the context
of the bill, that the committee does need to think about
how buildings can be built better from now on so
that we don't have this problem.
And New Zealand obviously has a massive insurance problem.
So it's good that the government is looking at all of this.
I do agree that the bill has some positives in terms
of strengthening according to risk
and getting rid of the MBS.
You will have heard how this has caused many problems
for owners, uh, having to remediate.
They just can't get the buildings up as a heritage advocate.
Um, um, impossible.
However, and I've said this to Minister Pink, the, um,
this bill in my view leaves a number
of problems unresolved from the current act.
It doesn't do enough to support the owners
of apartment buildings, which you will have heard about.
And I support, uh, Geraldine Murphy and her work.
She's done a lot of work over a long time.
Um, my view is that life safety is
to narrow a category I appreciate it puts up costs,
but building resilience for the sake of our cities
and towns does need to be considered,
and it should be changed.
I don't believe that we should classify all URM buildings
with an unsecured facade as being a risk.
Um, they should have an assessment done.
Um, members Wade Brown Foster will be aware
around the issues around flexibility
of remediation timelines.
Often that can be a millstone around the neck of owners,
just giving people more time to get stressed about the fact
that they don't actually have enough building
and money to the, um, strengthen the building.
The priority buildings has been a massive problem in
Wellington where we, um, look and it just won't work.
It needs to be narrowed, just basically means that the whole
of the CBD can be covered as it is now.
And, um, it hasn't worked to put such a blanket, uh,
requirement on, um,
I'm a little bit concerned about miss removing
areas like Auckland.
Maybe you can do that for now.
But any, um, assessment should be based on science,
not on political considerations.
And I also, um, strongly, uh, oppose removing requirements
around fire and accessibility access.
25% of our country is faces disability.
Um, and also we still need to be cautious about fire,
even though our buildings are much safer now.
Thank you for your time. Thank
You. We've got about a minute, a
bit left.
So our questions, colleagues,
Elia smiling if you wanna, you've got go.
That's all right. Yeah, of course.
And welcome, nice to see you around a different tape
and different hats.
Um, I was interested in, I, I recognize the issue
and the com and we'll probably have some more information
with the, um, about corporate bodies
and so forth and the market.
If you've got somebody who's on very low income
but does have own that property,
are you looking at things like suspensory loans
and, um, property in order to be able to fund
what needs to be done collectively?
And, and how would you deal with where, I mean, I'm
fortunately renting perhaps for this issue,
but you know, you've got 32 apartments
and let's say 30 of the owners want to get on
and do something and the other two don't.
What what are our, um, mechanisms
for dealing with those issues?
This all, no one should be kicked out of their home.
Um, it's not anyone's fault if they can't afford it,
but generally, I think that a whole lot
of funding mechanisms need to come into play.
We, as you know, we did,
we put some rates relief in at Wellington City
Council. Grants
And loans are the answer to help people pay.
The loans are tied to the property. Yeah. Thank you.
I'll see you again. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Okay, we have now got, uh, the Body Corporate Chairs group,
Tim Jones and Tim is on Zoom.
Tim, welcome. Nice to see you there. Thank
You, Mr. Yeah, thank you Mr.
Chairman, thank you very much
indeed for, uh,
Time. I'll hang
on. We, we've got you,
we've got you down for 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call with about four to go.
Uh, just in terms of question time, um,
you can take your submission as read,
but please highlight the bits you want to highlight
and, uh, while you go.
Thank you. I've got several points to highlight if I may.
Uh, but first, thank you very much indeed for, uh,
having the opportunity to speak today.
If I could just, uh, make a disclosure first
and to the committee that I in fact, sat,
sat on the steering group, uh, that produced this report.
So, to some degree, I have a, a vested interest in, uh,
in the, in the report
and obviously the bill that, uh, uh,
flows outta that report.
Um, the Body Corporate Chairs group represents apartment
owners throughout the length and the breadth of the country.
And I just have listened to the previous speaker.
And, uh, we, we are, uh, an organization that looks
after, um, a number
of apartment buildings all over the country, uh,
is our submission that we support the intent of the bill.
Uh, and of course, in particular, option three
that's in the report.
Um, this shifts us away from a blanket NBS system,
which proved, uh, very problematic for some people towards,
uh, uh, an risk specific building typology
and better reflects the life safety risk, uh,
and is fairer for apartment owners in, in many respects.
Um, we have some concerns about the low risk zone, um, uh,
identification, uh, particularly Auckland and Aland.
Uh, we would say that, uh, it is probably, uh, important
to ensure that this is not a no risk zone, uh,
but a low risk zone.
And, uh, we have some concerns that, uh,
some URM type buildings in, uh, high, um,
traffic areas may well still be at, at risk, uh,
and particularly concerned Mr.
Chairman, when I read, uh, a report in the paper
and the news that, uh, they have found some faults
underneath Auckland, which they weren't aware of previously.
So that really highlights that, that point we feel, uh,
we do support the targeted retrofit, uh, uh, uh,
um, uh, process.
In other words, uh, secure facades, uh, targeted, uh,
retrofit, uh,
or a full, uh, retrofit, which offers a great deal
of flexibility and, uh, will greatly assist, uh,
those apartment owners, uh, that, uh,
fall into one category or the other.
Uh, and many apartment buildings, which were previously bbs,
uh, uh, now will fall away.
Um, particularly in the Auckland area.
Of course, we support the narrowing
of the any pi time pathway,
but it's concerned
that the territory authorities may trigger engineering
assessments, uh, uh, uh, uh, too readily, um,
where these evaluations are for public safety.
We believe that the territory or authorities
and not individuals should bear the costs.
The other point that needs
to be addressed in this particular area is around multi, uh,
ownership buildings such as apartments,
where in some cases the obligations
and requirements, um, are for something
to be done within 20 working days.
Uh, which for an apartment building, uh,
is just completely unworkable.
Uh, our submission is that those should be extended
for apartment buildings to 60 working days.
Uh, we are concerned somewhat
that the EPB methodology will not be ready when the bill,
um, it becomes law if it does.
Of course, in this current form, uh, we accept
that there is a, uh, catch 22 type situation.
Uh, but the lack of clarity around
what constitutes this high risk diff dis efficiency, uh,
will place some apartment owners, uh, uh, in a serious,
uh, disadvantage.
Um, a point that was raised by the last speaker,
which I want to reiterate again,
and I know that it was one that the, uh,
inner city Wellington have been, um, uh, submitting on very
strongly is the lack of assistance within the legislation,
uh, towards financial, um, uh, support
for apartment building owners, whether they are, uh, uh,
in an ordinary apartment building or a heritage building.
Uh, as there are many in Wellington, uh, many owners, uh,
in apartment buildings face, uh, significant difficulties.
Um, uh,
and it's our view that there should be a greater, uh,
or the crown should address, uh, any incentives
and remove as many barriers as possible for apartment owners
to be able to, um, remediate their buildings.
On that vein, um, the report talks about, um,
uh, support for apartment owners, uh,
navigating the seismic review work.
Uh, and there was a previous, uh, um,
scheme called the Navigator Support Services, uh,
which was essential to guide apartment owners.
Uh, through the process, we would, uh, seek, uh,
reinstatement of this, uh, service, uh, at the Crown's cost
to help, uh, apartment owners to remediate their buildings
where they are deemed to be, uh, needing full retrofit.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, the very last point I'd like
to make I is one that's more general to the legislation,
which is that there is a mismatch between the definition
of owner, which is RA, to arrange to, uh,
apartment buildings and throughout the ACT and apartments.
If an apartment owner is in an apartment
where they have notice from a territory authority,
the territory authority is gonna have to serve notice on
all owners in the building, maybe as many as a hundred,
a couple of hundred, maybe as little as 10 or 20.
But the problem is that the, um, uh, definition
of owners in the bu in the act, uh, does not deal with, uh,
the, uh, issue of apartment owners.
In fact, in many respects, the, uh, definition in regards
to apartments should deal with the body corporate,
which in fact is in fact responsible
for the maintenance and upkeep of the building.
So, Mr. Chairman, during the, um, SE
and review group, Wellington City Council made it very clear
to us that this is one of their biggest problems with trying
to deal with an apartment building where the definition
of owner, uh, is every unit owner in the building,
which is administratively, uh,
a very difficult thing to achieve.
Uh, and this washes through to any part of this legislation
that deals with owners.
In summary, we support the
targeted approach under Bill three
And a half sleeve.
Oh, thank you. Well, we, we would say
that we support this, um, legislation that stands.
There are some tweaks, which I have indicated, uh,
and I'm open to questions from the, uh, committee.
Thank you for your time, sir.
Tim, thank you very much. I really appreciate that,
uh, colleagues questions.
It's pretty self-explanatory what the ask is. Yeah.
Um, Tim, can I just ask one thing,
and you do refer to it in your submission in terms of, uh,
the, um, further details of the BCCG being able
to be obtained on your website.
Could you just tell us a little bit about the, the,
the geographic spread of, um, of your membership just as
and where it's a reasonable proxy for geographic spread of,
um, body course Yes. By the sort of
Thing? Yeah.
Um, well, we,
we have over about 500 members, sir.
Um, most of those are in the Auckland region
and will now have turned their minds away from seismic
completely, which is a bit unfortunate.
Um, we have a couple of hundred in Wellington, uh,
Christchurch of course.
Um, we have a crowing number in Christchurch
because of the number of apartment buildings.
We have some in Dunedin
and um, some in Queenstown as well. So throughout the country,
But, but Auckland, Auckland dominates
Yes, sir. Absolutely.
Yeah. Which is the biggest
center of apartment buildings.
Yeah. And, and is growing, of course. Yep.
Okay. No, thank you. Um,
I don't think I have any other question. I, Celia, yeah,
Just a quick one and, um, maybe another submitter
or, um, others would be better placed.
But if you can just help me just
the talking about facade securing, do you think that that
does include replacement with lookalike lightweight,
or do you think it just is limited
to securing what there is?
'cause there's a number, I mean, again,
it would be particularly relevant for Heritage,
but it might not only be heritage buildings
where you've got some details that as they currently stand,
could fall and hit a passerby,
but if they were replaced by light white, they wouldn't.
Well, having sat on the steering group, uh, um, uh,
my understanding was it was, uh,
strengthening the existing facade so
that it did not fall on people in the street, rather than
removing that facade and replacing it
with a lightweight equivalent,
Because certainly it's been done for chimney
and so on, on heritage buildings where they've been replaced
with a replica that's lightweight, that's not going to
land on and kill people.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, and I just wonder whether we needed
to include that somehow in a definition
as a reasonable alternative.
Yeah. I think that probably
When you come for eligibility for loans
and so on, we need
to be clear what's eligible and what's not.
Yes, I understand all of those points.
I think probably that's a question
you should ask an engineer.
Um, c certainly they have, um, views on this.
I'm certain of that.
Thank you. Thank you, Tim. Bri, appreciate it.
Thank you, sir, very much indeed. Thanks for your time.
Yeah,
Perfect Engineer.
Okay. I was gonna ask questions about, uh, Dunedin,
but I thought given the next submitter as well, uh,
we'll go straight to the, to Dunedin.
So, um, right. Russell, welcome. Lovely to have you here.
Thank you members. Thank you, Mr. Foster.
Now, um, you, uh, this, you
and the Heritage Trust,
so you are gonna take 10 minutes, I understand.
Yeah. The Heritage Trust is gonna take five. Yes.
And the Heritage Trust is also here, Joe. Right. Okay.
Do you wanna come up as well? Do you wanna take it as 15
between, or what do you want to do?
Uh, no, you'll cut 10, five. Okay.
Right. 10. Okay. Yeah.
Well, I'll give you a call with about four to go
and, um, in your hands.
Alright. Okay.
Um, thank you. Um, good afternoon members.
Um, I am represent six Dunedin City councilors, um,
here on the submission.
And collectively we represent 57% of the votes cast, uh,
for elected councilors at the 2025 elections on one of them.
I'm here for two reasons. Firstly,
to advocate on the strongest terms
that Dunedin should remain a low risk seismic zone.
I'm gonna outline the disastrous consequences
of the new legislation on Dunedin and,
and show how it's completely contrary to the state intent
of making it more cost effective
and user friendly to retain and reuse buildings.
Secondly, I'm gonna examine some of the key issues
around the science and the National Seismic Hazard Modeling
report and the proposed new, um, loading standard A 1170.
I'm also gonna examine the Becca economic analysis report
of May, 2025,
which underpinned the decisions around the legislation.
And we believe as a teaser
that the report is neither professional,
credible, or realistic.
But first, some, some context.
Um, Dunedin has a unique concentration of,
of heritage building, and it's the very essence
of its character and its, its critical mass
of heritage is our highest rated visitor attraction.
Um, the contribution to the Dunedin Gross
to meet the product was a tip of tourism,
was $379 million last year in rising.
And at present, Dunedin has 323 earthquake prime buildings.
Um, there's a total of six
and half thousand buildings that are going to be classified,
and there are still 3,700 yet to be classified,
and we expect the final total of earthquake prime buildings
to be around 600.
Now, the Eden Council has confirmed that it's unknown
how many three level unreinforced masonry buildings there
are in Dunedin, but they have confirmed
that two levels plus a basement will be
considered a three level building.
And this is a critical point
because under the, um, under the new legislation,
a three level unreinforced masonry building must have a
full retrofit.
There's no partial law just facade securing it's full.
Um, and this is particularly, um, important for Dunedin
because Dunedin has moved from low risk to medium risk.
The z ratings increased by 92%, which means that the cost
to retrofit is gonna be significantly more.
And Dunedin is a complete outlier in this respect.
And at the present time, many
of our earthquake prime buildings are significantly
underutilized or they're vacant
and they're, they're typically on their landmark buildings.
They're, um, often on corner sites,
but they're not viable economic propositions, uh, as a,
as a heritage building and, uh, owner
and building contractor, I understand this intimately.
It's expensive and risky to do strengthening.
Old buildings are frustrating.
They're not plum level
or square is often rotten decay uncovered during the work.
They consume vast amounts
of labor hours and supervision time.
I have the scars and the job cost to prove it.
And money spent on this is essentially a sunk cost.
It's not available to make the build
to upgrade the buildings to increase their economic yield
or increase their fire risk
or their, their life safety risk.
Now, turning out of the science, oops.
Um, one of the key assumptions made in the, um, the standard
that dries the, uh, seismic loadings that sta uh,
ts 1170 0.5 is the fatality risk.
Now, the standard has assumed a fatality risk
of one in a million or between one in 100,001 in a million.
This is a massive assumption
because there's no definition in legislation of this.
And the Otago Regional Council
for the same fatality risk factor uses a risk factor
of one in 10,000 that is 100 times lower.
No, no discussion was ever made about why the standard took
this took this much higher standard
and for members, for context, for members, the risk
of fatality in a road accident in New Zealand in 2024 is
just under one in 20,000.
Um, in the entire history of New Zealand,
no one in Dunedin has ever lost their life
in an earthquake ever.
So therefore, that the way it's clear we can adopt a
different definition of low probability.
And even the standard at page four supports this option
saying there are many values in between.
And tolerance depends on factors such as perceptions
of costs, of achieving the risk
and the benefits that accrue.
Um, we further say
that the standard has already made an exception
for existing buildings being held
to a lower standard than new buildings.
And that a senior member of the technical advisory group
for the standard confirmed me that that reason for
that was there was a, what he called an overall ness
and assessments of the seismic modeling and the standard.
And we say that adds up to precision
and it's unreasonable to foist the dramatic consequences
of this new legislation,
which is Dunedin being the only city
to move from low risk to medium.
Along with, uh, with Amaru
and further the eng, the New Zealand Society,
earthquake Engineers has confirmed that the crown in terms
of its own priority buildings,
is exempting itself from the EPB legislation
and is going to adopt its own risk, but hasn't
provided any detail on what that might be.
So we say if an exception can be made
for Crown priority buildings, which include hospitals
and schools and police stations in very high risk areas,
and exception can be made for Dunedin,
which isn't a very low risk area.
Now, turning now to the, the national, uh, the GNS report,
the which, the 2022 seismic hazard, the Society
of Earthquake Engineers also confirmed that there was,
in its overview of this, um, study,
there was a paucity of data.
There was IE there was no evidence
for the low seismicity regions
and that in consequence, new models were, were applied
to account for the reduced number of observations.
And this resulted in increases in hazard.
So what they did was they didn't have data,
so they changed the assumptions.
Well, we say that's simply compounding on top
of assu assumption, and the end result is highly engineered
to arrive at high risk
and it's driven solutions
that are not economically sustainable.
It's also very alarming to us.
The scientists themselves could not agree.
They state at section three that it is not reasonable
or even prudent to pursue a consensus model for this.
They said this would remove uncertainty,
but would provide false confidence.
And they used a system called a logic tree,
which was experimental and never used for, um, to try
and eliminate some of the, the wide range
of opinion from the scientist.
That particular system was used to model volcano,
eruption risk, and sea level rise, um,
and had never been used before.
They did not use experts external to the national,
to the seismic team for peer review.
And the technical advisory group,
which the charter said was meant to be roughly evenly split
between science experts and technical end users,
Got just under four minutes left,
Had five engineers.
Um, and only one of those was, um, one was from Auckland
and one was from Napier and the rest from Wellington.
We say this over representation from the region, um, as it
as, as shows an undue pessimism.
And we say the results cannot be relied upon.
Um, and turning now to the Becca economic analysis, um,
there is a number of alarming mistakes in the report at page
four, it states, the report says there are 160 earthquake
pro buildings in Otago,
and the report does not include allowance for any others.
The first problem is, I have an email from the Needin
Council January this year saying there are 323 Earthquake
Pro buildings and there are still 3,700
to be, uh, to be classified.
The, the second, the third problem is
that the financial estimate of bi Becca
of a 2011 Christchurch earthquake event is
$30.4 billion.
And $12.6 billion of this is for people related losses.
Now using treasury guidelines, this is equivalent
to 685 deaths or 6,900 serious injuries.
This is frankly ridiculous.
This is more the entire number of earthquake related deaths,
which is a total of 510 in the entire history of New Zealand
for a nighttime event.
And Becca justify this at page 29 by saying we,
we consider that over half the earthquake prime buildings
are residential, which is a huge problem
because I have an email from the Dunedin City Council saying
there is exactly one residential earthquake prime building
in Dunedin at this time.
We say in summary, the Becca report is so flawed,
inaccurate, it's not professional, credible or realistic,
and you should ask for your money back
and get a peer review for a proper report.
Because they did not even visit Dunedin.
They visited Christchurch in Wellington eight times
and never visited Dunedin.
Well, I'd be very happy to take Christians. Well,
We're certainly getting some reaction.
So, um, questions, colleagues, did you have a question?
Simon? Mr. Chair, do you have one?
No, I'll let you
Go first. Alright.
Oh, look, this is really concerning
and yes, given the direction that the government has said
that we wanna reduce the impact on property owners
and local government, um, you point out that Sienna, uh,
has three to 500 year old buildings, multi-story buildings
with Unreinforced masonry, um, and, and,
and yet they don't have any of these requirements, um,
and they accept the risk.
Uh, are you suggesting
that we should have no rules whatsoever?
I'm saying that that's, that's a result the Italian
government relied upon.
We are simply, our position is that there is a one in two
and a half thousand year, um, probability
of a one in 500 year event in Indonesian.
And that's based on these highly subjective
findings that I've just outlined.
And that, that was just a selection.
I I wanted to say there's far more disclaimers and,
and in, in the report, and I'm not an engineer,
but I could, you know, I don't have to be engineer to read
that there was no consensus,
there was a wide range of opinion.
They used a risk factor 100 times higher than
the regional council.
So it's incredible to me.
And then what's incredible is the beca report
is completely flawed.
It's, it's actually irrelevant.
Okay. So I mean,
my question was should there be any rules at all?
I mean, let's assume there's some, there's some kind
of risk assessment required.
Yeah. But your, your contention is that the risk is low
and should remain low.
Hmm. Um, you just wanna give us a steer as to what, um,
there are some particular buildings
that you're concerned about, um,
with need additional strengthening if the risk level was
elevated, uh, e that that had value or already part of the,
I I may not have said, but we estimate there are 100
buildings that are three levels
or greater in Dunedin that are,
that will need strengthening.
And many of them are effectively vacant
or significantly underused.
And my MS Gala will point out that demolition
by neglect is a very significant problem now
because dunedin's rents are low.
It's not, you know, it's different to Wellington
and Auckland, uh, economy is, you know,
struggling at the present time.
And so, you know, there's a, there's a very large chance
that we'll lose these buildings
and we simply say the science does not.
There's the, the, a Professor Mark Sterling
of Atta University has received over $400,000
from the earthquake and War dam, uh,
or the Natural Hazards Commission to study the Atory fault.
Now, the earthquake and war damage commission's only
interest is in minimizing calls on its funds
and maximizing the amount of the risk
to them in an earthquake
because their reserves are drained in the
2011 Christchurch earthquake.
And so, you know, we're not accusing Mr.
Sterling of, of, you know, skewed results,
but clearly, you know, he's, we are saying the,
the natural Hazard Commissions studies are in wider
opposition to the greater public.
Good. In terms of the, you know,
Wider, so the incentives are skewed.
You might summarize it as
Yeah, well there's, there's been, yeah, 10 years
of research into the Atory folk
and I, I would say that a senior member
of the technical advisory group said to me,
his experience is that the seismicity
of region is in direct proportion to the number
of scientists studying it.
Russell, look, thank you very much.
Um, your, your time's finished.
If you wanna stay that's fine. Up at JP Southern Heritage.
Great. Thank you. This is on, I take it. Oh, I,
We've got you down as, uh, for five minutes, but,
Um, excellent. Oh,
I'll go as quick as I can. Okay.
Um, so I'm, I'm hoping
that you all know our beautiful city of Dunedin.
I'm, I was there last do That's excellent. Yep.
Um, it is New Zealand's Heritage Capital, a city
of many historic firsts, including the first university.
We rely on the color
and character of these ornate buildings to attract visitors
and new residents alike.
It's not just a heritage building dotted here
and there, though that tourists and residents enjoy.
It's a critical mass
of ornate Victorian buildings framing our vistas.
With all due respect to other centers that have lost
so much of their heritage.
No other New Zealand center has kept what we've still got.
Our growing tourist industry supports our multimillion
dollar visitor economy.
And one survey has told us that heritage is one
of two main reasons they visit Dunedin Dunedin's appeal
and tourist economy would be severely impacted.
There's no doubt it's our marketing point of difference.
And heritage has for the first time become a key portfolio
in a new elected Dunedin city Council.
But right now many of our buildings are in deep trouble.
And I just want to outline to you the state, uh,
the per state that we are in, that we know of.
There are five multi-story masonry buildings
with ornate facades in dunedin's main streets
and connecting streets in the CBD that owners have abandoned
to let them run out.
Given the state of these former beauties,
they're sitting there marking time
for the bulldozer, we will fight that.
But without both government
and city council remedies, we are doomed to fail.
In the past month alone, we've lost a pre 1900 church
and the north end and a grand 1820s
landmark home just above the octagon.
Our Dunedin city council's own bluestone municipal chambers
in the Octagon is currently scaffolded and empty.
Last year we lost three Mason Red,
two story heritage buildings also connected
to the Chinese history in downtown Rat Tray Street.
And two of the last three last remaining 18 six buildings
will donate facades at the south end of Princess Street.
The slow but steady demolition of Dunedin,
as we know it is moving at pace.
Many of our buildings are privately owned by individuals
or small family entities who don't have the finance
to undertake full modern standard seismic upgrades under
the existing framework.
The result in too many cases is buildings are left vacant
and in a dangerous state of disrepair, not
'cause owners are unwilling to act, but
'cause the cost of compliance and repairs is beyond reach.
Three quarters of our existing earthquake farm buildings are
unreinforced masonry.
It gives you an idea of the impact
of this legislation on Dunedin.
Our trust was very excited
to hear this government would apply some common
sense to seismic rules.
Mm-hmm. And we thought would encourage heritage reuse.
However, I have to say we are bitterly disappointed.
While our trust strongly supports the intent
of this amendment bill to induce,
to introduce a better approach, we ask
that Dunedin remain a low risk seismic area based on the
submission and also the, the scientific debunking
that you've just heard from Councilor Lund
remaining at low risk
and reaping the full benefits
of this legislation has the potential
to save many heritage buildings in Dunedin,
provided the legislation genuinely allows cost effective
solutions, which it currently does not.
It's ironic that this legislation appears
to discourage economic growth in Dunedin, yet we thought
that was what this government prides itself on.
While we'll listen to robust updated science when it makes
sense, the practical effect of this reclassification is
to expose owners to assessments
and higher compliance costs
that would not apply if Dunedin remained low seismic risk.
In turn, this risk the economic success of businesses
and property owners, the risk profile
for Dunedin profile needs needs to remain low
to avoid this perverse outcome.
There are 323 earthquake pro buildings in Dunedin.
Not 160 years be relied upon says,
and a massive 3,800 Dunedin buildings AWAI assessment,
which will, as Russell says,
yield a hundreds more earthquake pro buildings.
Just one extra point here.
Um, I'm not sure, we've only got about minutes left by this.
Sorry, I've just, just about finished. Yep. Okay.
I won't go to that one.
Um, in summary, this legislation risks unintentionally
accelerating the loss of the very buildings
that give Dunedin its character.
Instead of making it easier to repurpose
and restore buildings, developers
and people in the business of knocking down buildings
for car parks will have a field day
and cheap, bland, bland shoebox apartments
as is currently consented for the demolished property
and above the octagon will proliferate.
Many people didn't.
Many Dunedin people were incredibly upset
to see this large landmark come down.
And they'll be even more upset when they
see what replaces it.
Thank you. We ask the committee
to ensure the final legislation better supports the economy
of not just the rest of New Zealand,
but also Dunedin. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, our time is up,
but I will, I will ask one question of you.
So what you are saying is that there's a, a number
of buildings which are being lost already
before essentially putting another impost on,
uh, underneath buildings. That's,
Yeah. What I'm
saying is it is tough enough now. Yeah.
And the costs are already sky high
and they're going to get even worse.
And I cannot see how building owners can
maintain their buildings in that environment, in
that legislative environment.
It's just wrong for Dunedin.
And just one other question, which is,
how strong are your district planning rules on protection
of buildings that you deemed to be important?
Nowhere near strong enough. Nowhere near strong enough.
Um, so there's another remedy there
and we have to approach our city council about that.
And we are working on that. Okay.
Um, and hopeful of, of some solutions,
but we cannot move fast enough.
I understand what you're saying.
You'll be aware the regulatory relief Mr. Foster,
that's impinges on
That. I'm,
I'm, I'm aware that there, I'm aware there is an issue.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Really appreciate time.
Thank you. Further conversation. Thanks Chris.
Right, thank you. Okay. Right.
We've now got, uh, the New Zealand, New Zealand Society
for Earthquake Engineering.
Think they're on online, they're on Zoom.
Yes, we are on Zoom. Yes, you are indeed.
We've got, we can see you both.
Um, so, um, Han
and Didier, nice to have you here.
We've got your submission, which you can take us read, um,
but we've got you down for 10 minutes
and, um, if you wanna use the first, uh, say six minutes of
that, I'll give you a call with four to go, uh,
just in terms of, uh, potential
for some questions, but, uh, in your hands.
Hey, good afternoon.
Uh, my is Bran, uh, president of the New Zealand Society
for Earthquake Engineering, which is a broad based society,
which includes everyone interested in
earthquake risk and resilience.
Our society has been at the forefront
of earthquake assessment
and retrofit of the EPB system with me is Didia Peta,
a structural engineer in practice and research,
and also Julian Benito,
who is president-elect of the society.
We, uh, our society very much appreciates the government's
timely, uh, initiative to review the EPB system.
And we recognize
that there were definitely lessons from the implementation
of the current system.
We support the general direction to use a risk
for focused approach to simplify the system, provide
for targeted strengthening to reduce risk caused by the,
some of the worst of the worst buildings.
We are here, here to highlight today.
Some of the issues be available to answer any questions
and can follow up with any supplementary
information you might vote.
Just touching first on Oakland in the low hazard area,
earthquakes don't kill people, but the buildings do.
And risk is a combination of the hazard, it's likelihood,
the vulnerability of buildings and the exposure of people.
We consider that the buildings posting the greatest risk
should be catered for in the new system regardless of
where they are, including in Oakland.
Oakland indeed has a lowest seismic hazard,
but not no hazard.
In the four decades, uh, of my practice, uh,
seismic hazard has changed significantly across, uh,
New Zealand when new information
and knowledge has become available.
For example, Christchurch was considered a low
and perhaps medium has that area when the Christchurch, uh,
earthquakes happened 15 years ago.
And we know that a lot of buildings were affected
and there was considerable, lots of life.
Oakland has vulnerability
and a, uh, share of very vulnerable buildings
and a large exposure of the people being the biggest C city.
For example, the Becca report indicated a benefit cost ratio
of 0.7 2.8 for strengthening URM elements.
And this is not much lower than one given.
Then there are lot of intangible benefits
of strengthening also internationally.
It's recognized that benefit cost is not an adequate
indicator of risk when considering lower frequency,
higher consequences.
We therefore consider it's appropriate to
consider retrofitting Oakland.
Therefore, we recommend
that bringing the Burst buildings in the system is
appropriate regardless of where they are,
including in Oakland.
The second point I would like to touch up uh,
touch on is landslides.
The proposed build focuses solely on the building structure.
New Zealand has a rugged and hilly terrain,
and its prone to landslides.
As we saw in recent rainfall events,
earthquakes can cause landslides in slopes which are
otherwise stable, as we saw in the 2016 kaikora earthquake.
But in that case, only lifeline infrastructure was, uh,
in the way and affected even otherwise.
Well-built buildings are no match to that nature
and forts of landslides.
I had the opportunity to visit, uh,
and study the effects of the 2008
and 2016 earthquakes in China
and Japan where landslides caused severe disruption.
The eventually and earthquake in China caused many
fatalities from building collapse due to landslides.
It was a very sobering experience to see bean city
where landslides destroyed
and even bulldozed many buildings causing mass fatalities,
including a school where hundreds of children sadly died.
So the focus of this build building has been
on the structure alone.
We consider it important that we as leaders in industry
and government, have a responsibility to society
to consider the potential
and significant, uh, losses as possible from landslides.
Priority buildings is the third point I want to touch on.
Priority buildings such as hospitals, schools,
lifeline buildings are critical for society,
including in the aftermath of large earthquakes.
They can directly
and indirectly cause loss of life significantly, and
therefore they require priority focus.
As many of these priority buildings are owned by local
and central government
and state enter enterprises, prioritizing
and a actioning to strengthen the buildings we are required
will ensure that we, uh, can lead by example
for other building owners to follow.
I'd like to now pass on to Didier to talk about some
of the structural points
We've got just under five minutes left.
Okay. Thank you. I'll keep this part short then.
Uh, thanks. Grab.
Um, so a couple of the points that I wanted to highlight.
Uh, first one is, is around the proposed,
uh, anytime pathway.
Um, we believe that territorial authorities, they need
to maintain the ability to manage risks
of severely deficient buildings that emerge over time.
Uh, and a key aspect really is the recognition that the,
the engineer, the engineering profession's understanding of
what constitutes a high risk building will change with time,
uh, particularly when issues arise from, say,
past design standards or construction approaches.
So we've seen this, uh, come through from, uh,
reconnaissance missions to past earthquakes, um,
perhaps more so following the Canterbury, uh, earthquakes
and the Kaikora earthquake.
Uh, clearly they give a very good local context.
Uh, and so from that, we get examples of, say,
the CTV building typology, uh,
or the precast floor, uh, systems and multi-story buildings,
and those types of issues which we now grapple with.
Uh, additionally to that, uh,
we think it should be recognized
that some previous assessments, uh,
were not made under the current, uh,
or within the context of current legislation.
Uh, and therefore there needs to be that mechanism
to reconsider those cases, uh, as they, as they come up.
So with that in mind, we see opportunity to adjust the bill
to ensure that a pathway is available
for territorial authorities
to require assessment identification.
Uh, that's not time bound,
and that would be the key thing there.
Uh, the other point I'd,
I'd highlight is the proposed 15 year timeline
extension for retrofit.
Uh, our concern here is that this length
of extension will see building owners, uh, demotivated in
to carry out seismic strengthening, uh,
even when it could be relatively straightforward.
Um, and that's because there probably will be some hope
that somewhere in the 15 years, a further relaxation
of the system will emerge.
So our suggestion here is that the extension be limited
to five years, uh,
but there are possible subsequent additional five year
extensions up to the 15 years.
Uh, any extension, uh, could come with a condition
that there are demonstrable steps being taken
by the building owner to arrange the retrofit, uh,
and sort of progress it from there.
Uh, and that, that sort of rounds out the key points we
wanted to, to bring to you today.
Uh, but we'd be happy to take any questions. Thank
You. Questions, Simon.
Thank you. Um, we've just heard, uh,
from some elected members of the Dunedin City Council,
their serious concerns about the Becker assessment
of seismic risk, uh,
and that it will drive basically hundreds, potentially
of Dunedin buildings to ruin, um, through abandonment
because not only are they not as risky as the assessment
suggests, but there's, their owners simply can't afford
or will not proceed to redevelop them to meet a a,
a medium risk standard.
What do you say to that?
Didier, do you want to talk
To? I, I was gonna say
I'm happy to, to feel that.
Um, I absolutely understand the, the concerns, um,
was just listening to, to that.
Um, I, I think the, the, there is a bit here, which we need
to watch and emerge,
and that's what the methodology,
what form the methodology takes, um,
because that will obviously bring some
of the key definitions, especially
around three story buildings and so on.
Uh, the acknowledgement that, uh, some of these
strengthening, if they are limited to facade
and parapets, which I think is really the key driver here,
is finding the best opportunity to, uh, enact
or enable those types of strengthening measures, um,
they can be cost efficient.
Um, and, and
therefore, uh, really it will be, what's that balance
of the methodology and the definition
between full building retrofit versus facade
and parapet in order to try
and mitigate some of those issues? Yeah.
Well, I, I guess the contrast
that was offered is a town like Sienna,
which has a whole lot of three to 500 year old buildings,
multi-story buildings with, uh, unreinforced masonry, uh,
have no controls on it,
and that's acceptable given their entire, like
economy is built around tourism and heritage.
Um, do, do you think maybe we've set expectations far
too high in New Zealand given the risks that we face?
I think there's a challenging balance there between, um,
comparing the different seismic contexts in the countries
between the two countries.
Uh, but I think there is also very good examples of
what happens, uh, when you don't do that.
And, uh, the town of Laila, um, not far from Ciena per se,
uh, in 2010 and,
and what happened there, you know, that was a, a total loss
of a city, um, due to the fact
that there is no strengthening, uh, required
and that will come down to a societal decision, um,
which is exactly why we're here at the moment, uh,
and whether that's, that's what we want to take the risk on.
Um, so I, yeah, a very difficult comparison
to make having lived in Italy for some years myself. Yeah.
Okay. Look, thank you. Thank you.
We, we have run outta time, so,
but we really appreciate that.
Great. No, thank you. Okay. Opportunity. Thank you.
We have Heritage New Zealand in the room,
so come on, come on up.
You've been mentioned in dispatch a few times on the way, so
probably expect the old question or two.
Alright, that's, uh, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
You can take your submission as, uh, red, um,
and I'll give you a call with about four to go. Okay,
Great.
Uh, ki Tato, my name is Dean Whiting.
I'm the Chief executive of Heritage New Zealand po.
I've got, uh, clear Craig next to news, the DCE, uh,
with me here, right, heritage New Zealand po.
We welcome this opportunity to present
to you today on the important earthquake prone Buildings
amendment bill, and the implications of the proposed changes
for our building heritage.
Uh, we are an autonomous crown entity governed by a board
and am Maori Heritage Council.
Our purpose is to promote the identification, protection,
preservation, and conservation of our historical cultural
heritage of al in New Zealand.
Our interest in the bill, uh, as New Zealand's, uh,
lead Heritage Agency is providing, um, expert technical
and conservation advice to councils
and owners of earthquake bro grown heritage buildings, uh,
significant proportion of, um,
earthquake prone buildings are heritage places.
We ourselves manage 46 heritage properties
on behalf of the crowns.
So we have firsthand experience of undertaking
significant seismic strengthening projects,
including Turnbull House across the road from Parliament.
Uh, many of you might be familiar
with a large wrapped building
that's across the road from the beehive.
So that's one we're currently working on.
Uh, and as today, I think they're putting in the RA slab,
so space isolated that building.
Uh, we also have a statutory function
to provide advice on heritage mat matters in the event
of a national local emergency.
Um, right now, just skipping over,
we've got three recommendations to make,
so I'll get to those soon.
Uh, general comments. Um, oh, one other thing.
We have a National Heritage Preservation Incentive fund.
Um, we have assisted many private owned, owned, uh,
places in New Zealand with funding
for seismic strengthening.
Uh, that that fund runs at about half a million
dollars, 500,000.
Okay. General comments on the bill.
As noted in our submission, we are supportive
of the key proposal of the bill
to establish a more proportionate
and risk-based regulatory system
for managing earthquake prone buildings.
So that's important. Uh, the proposed relaxation
of seismic strengthening requirements will reduce financial
pressures and the risk of unnecessary
or premature demolition.
Um, however, it's important that earthquake pro buildings,
um, continue to be strengthened irrespective
of the relaxation of statutory requirements.
So still trying to reach that standard of,
uh, of strengthening.
So the three specific recommendations that we have, um,
the first one is improved consultation
with Heritage in New Zealand.
We welcome, um, the continuation of requirements
to notify us when a council issues an earthquake
prone building notice.
However, the bill
and the building Act generally does not specify
any substantive role for our organization
beyond receiving this general notification.
Um, as a national agency responsible for heritage,
we recommend that consultation with us
be made a statutory requirement
before any enforcement action is taken on a heritage
building, including demolition or partial demolition.
Uh, recommendation two, uh, ensure
heritage values are considered
and exercising powers to take action.
So the bill maintains powers for territorial authorities
to intervene when owners fail to take action
or fail to take timely action.
Uh, this includes the power for territorial authorities
to undertake or authorize demolition.
We strongly acknowledge the overriding importance
of public safety,
but these powers raise concerns for heritage buildings.
We recommend that heritage values be considered
before determining what actions should be undertaken
with a stabilization repair partial all full demolition.
We also recommend that Heritage New Zealand
Ton has consulted prior to territorial authorities applying
to the district court for an order authorizing such work.
The last recommendation need
for continued focus on earthquake strengthening safety
and disability upgrades.
We acknowledge the rationale
for decoupling seismic requirements from fire
and accessibility upgrades to remove,
remove financial and other barriers.
And we've seen how these things can actually, um,
almost paralyze projects where you are having
to tick three boxes
before you actually get to the important ones, which is
around, uh, building safety for
however remains important, that fire safety
and accessibility improvements are undertaken in a timely
and coordinated manner.
We recommend heritage infrastructure planning
and financial incentives
to encourage owners to undertake this work.
And we will continue to provide advice
and support ensuring that heritage buildings are safe,
healthy, and enjoyable places for people to use.
So in conclusion, overall, we are supportive of the bill
and the general loosening of obligations on owners
of earthquake prone buildings.
Alongside the three specific recommendations we have
outlined, reiterate the importance of continuing
to strengthen earthquake prone heritage buildings
irrespective of the proposed relaxation
of statutory requirements.
We're happy to answer your question.
Thank you very much. Um, I'll, I'll start off with one.
Um, you were, I dunno if you've heard
the submission that we heard.
We've been sitting behind. You have, uh, representatives
of Dunedin City Council a little bit.
You have had a little bit of bit.
Yeah, so one of the things, I mean, Dunedin Roo, uh,
probably two of our biggest collections of, um,
heritage buildings as a, as in, in urban areas, one,
one area, putting them from low to medium risk.
And we've heard that a lot of those buildings are
marginal at best in terms of their,
the economics of strengthening them.
Um, you've got any comment on, on that?
Well, I guess it is that process of, of assessing, uh,
values, uh, heritage values alongside the, the, you know,
the, the cost benefits of retaining places like that.
And that's, I guess that's the complexity of a process
and how that works through.
But it is acknowledging that, you know, Dunedin, um,
you know, it's a Victorian
or Edwardian, uh, character city,
it's important that the retention of those in in the,
in in that sort of a sense. Yeah.
Uh, so how do we, um,
obviously the changes which are being made
here make that harder?
Yeah. Well it's, as we've said in our submission,
it's important that we try to, we try to achieve, uh,
strengthening, uh, you know, regardless of some relaxation.
So we're possibly still in the same space of promoting
that idea, but, uh, in terms of how they may, uh,
develop a process with the community of Dunedin
and assessing all those, that, that,
that would take some time to figure out. Yeah.
Okay. Simon, you had a question?
Yeah, I just want to, um, couple of lines, Mr.
Chair, if we've got time. First one is you, you know,
this Edwardian, you're a value.
I mean, isn't it correct that these houses that are regarded
as some kind of heritage, um, special, um, status from
that area were basically the initial homes of their day?
Uh, the initial homes? What do you mean? In
Small, I think
Quickly erected small site, it's, I mean, there's nothing,
at the time, there was nothing unique about them.
They were essentially like a flat, almost like a flat pack,
uh, type product, weren't they?
I think it's not relative to how they may have been seen
as the, the quality of the building at it in its time.
It's the cumulative effect of history
and people living in these places
that adds a different value set,
and that's what Heritage contributes to a society.
So comparing it in different ways.
So just on that, um, there's different value set
and who values it, isn't it?
Correct that we, you know, we're here to deal
with seismic issues
and this where seismic butts up against heritage values.
Isn't that correct in the end that ultimately the value
of a building is the value it has
to the private property owner,
and whether they're actually able to get a return
that justifies their investment in asset renewal
and maintenance, including seismic?
That's, that's always a factor,
and that's acknowledging it.
However, it's also how it sits in the context
of a community and a society.
So Heritage, um, has a value that contributes
and it also contributes to value in those surrounding areas.
So I'd also argue that heritage is value, the value
of heritage and contributing to societal,
but also to economic value within a community should also
be considered amongst that.
Well, if it has this, I mean, I guess to explore that,
if it has this additional value set
to the surrounding community,
but the cost, uh, to deal
with the heritage issue falls on the private property owner,
then are you suggesting
that the surrounding community should be contributing to,
uh, say seismic remediation?
That's, I know, I think that's the important
of having some sort of, um, incentive regime
that does support that
because there is a value that's often
beyond the individual owner,
but equally they can enjoy that value from other properties
and places that are around that creates an or a place
or special character. Mm.
So would you advocate for what a targeted rate
where people live in a suburb
and they have to contribute to upkeep a building?
I mean, I mean, what do you, what do you, how do you suggest
that the cost of this, um,
heritage requirement when it comes to seismic upgrade,
it's actually recovered from those who benefit?
I think that's, that's, that's a broad question about
how you might approach these things,
and I think I'm suggesting that there's a lot of value
that Heritage does contribute into that equation.
It's not a deficit. If you like,
The cost falls off, So we'll have to leave it.
We'll have to leave it there. Yeah.
But thank you very much. I really appreciate it.
Thanks very much. Thank you.
Okay, we've got the Nui Regional Heritage Trust
who are on Zoom.
Okay. Welcome. Got you there.
Um, you can, you can take your, um, submission as read, uh,
but if you wanna highlight any elements, that's fine.
We've got you down for 10 minutes if you want
to introduce yourselves and, um, uh,
I'll give you a call with about four to go.
Thank you. You can hear us okay? Yes, loudly. Thank you.
I'm Helen Craig, immediate past Deputy Mayor Wang Nui Town
Center Regeneration Champion locally, uh, co-chair,
the Wgnu Regional Heritage Trust,
and a member of the MB Review Steering Group
for this earthquake co prone Building system review. Bruce,
I'm, I'm Bruce Dixon.
I'm a heritage architect, um,
and I was a member of the Ministry of Arts
and Heritage Review panel for the Heritage Equip Fund.
And I mentioned this because we'll be referring
to this later in our submission.
Okay. Okay.
So, um, I'll, I'll begin.
Um, the Wnu Regional Heritage Trust looked at this,
this amendment bill from the point of view
of the Wnu region, um,
and other regions like it in New Zealand,
which are very similar and quite different
from the major cities.
The Wang Regional Heritage Trust considers
that the amendment bill is a sensible change
to the existing situation
and will provide a good balance between the risk
of life, uh, and the cost.
However, while the changes to requirements
with reduced seismic strengthening for some classes
of buildings are practical,
the result could diminish the overall resilience
of the building in the event
of a larger than normal earthquake.
This could result in buildings needing,
needing demolition rather than repair and restoration.
This, in turn, would affect the businesses in accommodation
within those buildings.
Business re resilience will be weaker as a result,
and some businesses in accommodation may be lost for good.
We acknowledge, however, that under the current legislation,
many heritage buildings will remain un strengthened anyway.
So anything that encourages restoration
over time is a bonus.
Facade collapse is probably the greatest risk to human life,
and we are pleased that the strengthening of these is
to be retained as a requirement, uh,
in the amendment Bill and me.
Earthquake zones like Wang UI owners will still have 25
years to act, and we question whether this is too long.
For the majority of small buildings, the cost
of facade strengthening will be relatively small.
Incentives for restoration
and shorter timeframes would be useful
to encourage strengthening earlier.
Our experience in Wong Nui is that small carrots
and set timeframes encourage restoration,
but the biggest barrier to restoration is accumulation
of building code requirements.
Once any building consent is sought, upgrades
or changes to the building to enable changing
or improved use in one area,
often triggers automatic compliance and accessibility.
Fire upgrades or seismic strengthening,
these upgrades in one go are usually unaffordable
in small town New Zealand.
And pleased this legislation will allow seismic work
to be done without triggering other building code upgrades.
But I'd urge policy makers to enable upgrades
or building work to any part
of a heritage building without triggering other aspects
of building code compliance.
Example, a fire upgrade
to enable a boutique music venue triggered a seismic
inaccessibility reports
and possibly forced compliance to his nearest,
to the current building code.
This was unaffordable, so the building remains underutilized
and the enterprise not going ahead.
If we are to save our heritage buildings, we need to make it
as simple as possible.
They've achieved a hundred plus years
and functioned well without these requirements will,
but will be underutilized or remain empty
and eventually lost if this process continues.
Okay. Um, while the trust believes in the purposes
of the bill as proposed,
we are concerned about the possibility
of unintended consequences, reducing the requirements
for many building owners to not strengthen at all,
apart from ADEs, reducing the resilience for both buildings
and businesses, and increasing the risk of heritage loss.
So while we regard the bill, um, as a, as an important step,
uh, in the economics of, uh, for building owners,
we are concerned that, um, building owners might not feel
so inclined to undertake strengthening, uh,
and restoration, um, now or in the future.
That the trust would like to encourage government
to consider support for the owners of Heritage Buildings
to reflect the public good
for increased life safety in the retention of our cultural
and architectural heritage.
This is for the benefit of the wider public
incentives can be a small carrot
to stimulate building upgrades.
The Heritage Equipped Fund prove this support
for owners can be just the incentive needed
to encourage building owners
to perceive the building upgrades.
Other examples of in incentives include access to low
interest or suspensory loans, access to technical
and project advisory support, access
to standard strengthening methodol mythology
for facade strengthening
and tax relief, um, such as the available
for asbestos removal, which has tax advantages.
The treatment of strengthening is a maintenance cost rather
than a capital cost.
Um, and the final, finally, we wanted
to talk about the Heritage Equip Grants fund system,
which worked extremely well for those four or five years.
It ran and
provided incentives for building owners
to strengthen their building and
upgrade them at the same time.
So we would encourage government to look, um, to providing
incentives to, to, to go along with the,
with the objectives of this bill.
Thank you. That's the end of our submission.
Thank you. Right. Questions, colleagues?
I've just got one and that is on, you mentioned tax relief,
and I think you're the first people certainly, um,
in oral submission to, um, to mention tax relief.
Um, often that, that gets talked about in terms of,
of commercial buildings where, you know, you can appreciate,
um, much more rapidly, uh, than residential buildings.
So it doesn't seem, doesn't help residential buildings,
but it does help commercial buildings.
Is that fair?
Yes. I mean, our focus is really on
the commercial buildings.
Um, we feel that the residential buildings, you know,
it's your responsibility to upgrade to your a home.
Uh, we're not talking about apartments
as a totally separate issue,
but we are concentrating on, uh, uh, commercial.
Okay. That's good.
I don't see any other questions, so really appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay.
We now have Engineering New Zealand. Well, Dr.
Kela coming up,
right?
You heard the draw. So, uh, I'll get the timer going now,
and, um, I'll give you a call with four minutes to go.
Thank you. Uh, good afternoon to the Select Committee.
Uh, I'm Richard, er, I'm the Chief Executive
of Engineering New Zealand, the Rana Ho.
Uh, sitting next to me is Tanya Williams,
our chief engineer, and Hamish McKenzie,
who is a board member, plus a principal structural engineer
for homes engineer.
Engineering New Zealand represents 23,000 members.
Uh, we represent the entire profession of engineering.
We regulate the profession and the credit
or tertiary training for the profession.
Engineers are the people who identify, determine, review,
fix, and rescue people from quake prone buildings.
Engineers support the bill as a pragmatic fix for a system
that isn't currently working to prioritize the buildings
with the highest life safety risk.
However, narrowing the system creates other risks,
which we have highlighted in our submission, three
of which we will identify now Amish.
Uh, the first comment that we wanted to make is the risk,
uh, of the decision to remove, uh, the lowest seismic, uh,
zones from the EPB system.
A lower seismic zone anywhere in New Zealand clearly does
not mean a no seismic zone and no seismic risk.
Auckland has significant volcanic activity,
and as an example, there are that we put in our submission,
there are 60,000 people
that walk down Queen Street in Auckland every day,
and they currently pass
and will continue to pass 21 earthquake prime buildings
that are listed buildings.
And many of these are due to unreinforced masonry,
unreinforced masonry kills people outside the building,
not just inside the building.
As we're seeing very clearly in the Christchurch, the
besides and para fall onto pedestrians and vehicles.
Removing Auckland from the system doesn't remove this risk.
It potentially creates a regulatory gap.
We believe that the fix for these is proportionate
and low cost if requiring, uh,
unreinforced mason leaf buildings
and high density pedestrian areas to secure fa um,
facades and parapets.
We're not saying a full, uh, seismic retrofit,
just making sure that the elements that are likely
to fall on people are fixed. And,
Um, and regarding change of use is a concern that, um,
section 1 1 5 is currently drafted,
will carve out any building
whose use has changed from needing to undergo review
of seismic performance.
Uh, we understand the intention of this clause is only
to apply to earthquake prone buildings,
but recommend clarifying this.
Uh, we support in principle the reduction in change
of use obligations for lower occupancy,
smaller scale buildings to stimulate reuse.
However, we recommend the current change
of use provisions are retained
with clearly defined exceptions, particularly
where increases in occupancy numbers
or use intensity are proposed.
And our final, uh,
request is about making the system work in practice
and in for engineers.
I'm just gonna quickly go through six areas,
which we've covered in our submission,
but the first is the methodology, which the entire system,
uh, depends on, and it doesn't exist yet.
It is, uh, going to be drafted,
but nobody can fully see, assess how this is gonna work
unless we have that drafted in this regard.
The next bit is to make sure, uh,
that we would would like this, um,
consultation requirements strengthened,
because at the moment the CE of mb, uh,
can set out a minimal, uh, industry input,
and then the industry has no recourse on this.
Third point I want to make around this is the, uh,
disappearance of the percent NBS when the bill passes.
This will continue to be used by insurance finance, uh,
and others, uh, in market assessments
until there is something to replace it.
Creating two systems, uh, that don't speak to each other.
Risk confusion for the public and the industry alike.
The fourth is about EPB stickers going, uh,
this was a simple way for the public
to make an informed risk when
entering an earthquake pro, uh, building.
Removing this may, uh, cause anxiety.
There doesn't seem to be a plan to explain this,
and it can't fall on engineers to explain how this works.
Our fifth point was about local government,
which already has a lot of reform,
adding this complex system, uh,
to implement without additional resourcing risks,
inconsistency amongst the councils.
Our sixth one in this regard is to create, uh,
we suggest creation of a central advisory panel
with experienced engineers to help, uh, that is set up
to help and assist engineers
and councils, uh, to make sure
that the transition goes well.
Thank you very much. Right,
and we are happy to take questions. We've
Got about four and a half minutes left, so,
Uh, the questions colleagues,
Simon?
Yeah. Quite, quite, quite a few.
We just deal with some of them.
Well, let's, let's have a couple to start with.
Couple to start with. Um, so we heard, so thank you
for submission s read.
Um, we heard from elected members in Dunedin
that the risk assessment that's lifted Dunedin from low
to medium, was carried out by engineering consultancy,
which never visited Dunedin.
Do you have concerns about that? Is engineering New Zealand?
I think, Uh, look, I don't know the details of
that, but, um, you know, a, a lot of, um,
that we will be based on science that's readily available
and, and, and isn't necessarily enhanced by, um,
being on the ground in a, in a certain center.
So, look, I, I struggled to, to, to, um,
you know, directly answer the question, so,
Okay. So you,
you, so you with homes,
Yes.
Would you consider it necessary to carry out, uh,
some monitoring or if you're doing a site investigation
or a site assessment, would you normally send an engineer?
Yeah, I mean, I, to suspect the site, I,
I suspect that the, the work
that was undertaken was a broad overview
of risk in a, in a region.
So, um, you know, spending, um,
specific time looking at buildings in a specific center
might not add to that context, um, in a significant way.
But, you know, um, being there on the ground, you know,
would be, would be, uh, uh,
a good idea in some, in some regard.
That's enough. Anyone else? Okay. Other questions?
Oh, one more thing. One more thing, Simon.
Um, you're concerned about removing the stickers?
When this legislation was first passed, one
of the suggestions that, uh,
act made was just have the stickers and nothing else
'cause about communicating risks to the public.
Uh, all of this work that has had
to be undertaken potentially could still be undertaken under
this new regime if it's to address a risk
and inform the public why, just have a sticker
and make people make up their own mind.
Uh, I'll, I'll fill this one.
I think the advantage of the stickers is
to communicate risk.
So if someone doesn't want
to go into an earthquake pro building, they don't have to.
The problem, particularly
with Unreinforced Mason Rebuildings,
is you may not be in the building,
but still may feel its impact.
So if you were, uh, walking down a street next
to an unreinforced mason rebuilding
and there's an earthquake, there is a reasonable chance
that the, uh, facade will fall on you.
So the sticker gives people the option of walking in,
but it doesn't stop the fact that people might be driving
or walking down the street.
So when we think about, say, tsunami risk,
which is a little teeny tiny sign,
small than a bus stop sign on a lamppost by the beach, um,
that tells you where to run.
Would something like that be
sufficient to tell people where to run?
Uh, well, you can potentially run from a tsunami.
You can't necessarily run from an earthquake.
So if an earthquake hits, you don't have time to respond
with a tsunami.
Normally you have the, and, uh, an earthquake, the long
and strong, and then there will be some time
before the tsunami arrives.
We are in an earthquake. If you're in a big earthquake,
uh, it's instantaneous.
And you're better to stay in the
Building in most cases. Yes.
So you should run into the building with the,
Okay.
Uh, it, it depends on the environment.
If we are in here and this building,
we'd all get under the tables. Yeah.
Because Of the risk Of
things. One quick
question from me and it, the, the, the system you,
you mentioned MDS, the system
that we've had for quite a long time.
A lot of the challenge that people have in understanding
and trusting that system is that a building is one day,
it's, it's one level of, you know, it's,
it's 82% the next level.
So next day, somebody else's decided it's 15%,
they change dramatically.
And of course, most of the assessments,
I think have an engineering component in them.
What is going on in the profession that we end up
with such a, a wide range of, um, numbers that seem
to change quite
Often. I think a lot of,
a lot of that came about, um, due
to updates and changes in, um, assessment methodologies, um,
after the Christchurch earthquakes.
So there was a lot of catch up, um,
following the Christchurch earthquakes
and the issue of updated guidelines in 2017,
since 2017,
and the settling of the resources
and guidance that underpins those assessments,
there has been far less of the issue that you talked to
around, um, changes of assessment outcomes.
Okay. So there has been a settling in the, um,
in the assessments for the last eight or so years. Okay.
Look, our time, our time is up. So thank you.
Really appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Okay. Right. We've got our homes who are in person.
Yeah, I'm staying here. Carry
On. Alright,
so away you go, John.
Right,
Right. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Thanks. Uh, well, good afternoon.
Um, I'm John here. I'm the managing director of homes.
Um, Hamish, you've already met.
He's wearing a slightly different
hat for the next 10 months.
Um, he's our, um, principal
and industry engagement lead been reduced.
Um, just a, a, a few brief notes.
Holmes is a, uh, a large New Zealand owned
and managed consultancy.
We are across New Zealand.
We also, um, have significant national presence.
We do work in the us um,
and curiously chasing earthquakes also in the Netherlands.
So we have a long experience of dealing
with seismic risk in buildings.
Um, from my perspective, I spent five years in San Francisco
back at the turn of the century, um, dealing
with exactly this problem, uh, during the sort of the throes
of the UMB ordinance that they had up there, um,
into the key points we want to, to get across.
I guess, um, it will sound like there's a bit
of an unfortunate juxtaposition of us with,
with engineering NZ who just went.
But, um, the first point I wish to make is, um,
we are generally supportive of the intent of,
of the bur as it's written.
We are very, um,
positive about shifting from a numeric based analysis,
which we think has been leading to perverse outcomes
to a more at based attributes based assessment where,
and we can pick out the worst of the worst of the buildings
and make sure something is done about it.
Um, we applaud that focus on the, the worst of the worst.
Uh, there were too many buildings on the list, uh,
that probably didn't need to be there.
And we are definitely in favor
of putting risk management back into the hands
of the owners of the buildings.
The best place to do that
and balance it with the other risks
they can deal with day to day.
Then we get to the buts.
Um, as you've just heard,
we are also concerned about the removal
of earthquake grown buildings, uh, in zone one.
Uh, certainly there are a lot of buildings that don't need
to be in that category, in that, in that zone,
but the unreinforced space,
20 buildings are definitely a hazard.
And I think it's important to, to repeat point
that was already made, that what we refer to
as low risk in New Zealand is just relatively low.
If you put New Zealand, for example, the level
of seismicity we have on the us which has genuinely low
zones Auckland sits about halfway across California.
So in other words, it's still a relatively
high seismic risk.
Um, you'll have seen or maybe seen in the last couple
of weeks, there's been published research
or discussions about published research finding faults in,
in both, um, Auckland and Hamilton regions.
So in other words, it's not low low, it's just low earth.
And historically there's a record of a,
of an earthquake in 1835
and South Auckland about the same magnitude
as Christchurch earthquake.
Uh, so our recommendation there is
that at least the masonry buildings in those zones are
included as earthquake prone buildings,
but we'd be totally in favor of having very,
very simplified nets to, um, strengthen action.
Um, we believe the proposed identifier any time pathway is
too narrow, um, and recommend
that legislation provides more flexibility
to the chief executive to take action as we have concerned
that generally, genuinely high risk burdens will be excluded
from the proposed regime with no mechanism to enable them
to be captured and addressed.
So put simply, there will be unsafe buildings
that won't fall into that EPB methodology criteria, whether
that's pre 1976 buildings, more modern buildings
or future buildings yet to be built.
Um, and those buildings that are bad need a mechanism
to be addressed.
In terms of change of use, uh, we foresee a range
of unintended or perverse outcomes with some
of those details outlined in our submission, um,
but with significant concerns around the applicability
of section 1 1 5 carve out.
Um, and we assume this only applies
to earthquake prone buildings, but that needs clarification.
Um, we also also have concern around change of
to higher occupancy classes or use intensities
and believe the current change
of use pro provision should remain in those circumstances.
Um, as uh mentioned, we're generally supportive
of the removal of seismic ratings
or percent M Bs as a identification tool.
Um, however, the proposed legislative change will place much
more rawness on the non EPB regime
and the broader building sectors management of seismic risk,
noting the very important
and ongoing role
that the seismic assessment system
plays in relation to that.
And we strongly encourage Envy's ongoing role in the
investment curation
and improvement of those non EPB regime resources.
We also note that the removal of the moderate earthquake 33
and a third percent NBS low are bound threshold from
legislation may leave unintended
gaps within the building act.
For example, identification of unsafe buildings,
as I've just mentioned,
or as a mechanism to deal with buildings damaged
by earthquake, noting the lack of any other provisions
to deal with that currently.
And so we, uh,
believe those regulatory gaps should be addressed.
Thank you. We've got, uh,
about four and a half minutes left.
Any questions? Uh oh, sorry. Sorry, more. Sorry. Sorry.
Um, so I'll be very quick.
Uh, we, we want to emphasize there's a, an important need
to maintain, uh, the systems
and support for the industry to adapt the changes, uh,
mentioned the simplified, um, strengthening
for masonry buildings.
I think there's work to be done in that space.
I think it's important that it is
made as simple as possible.
Uh, it's stuff that should be able to be, uh, executed
by carpenters, not engineers.
Um, we don't need that word. Thank you.
Um, and I'd like to say it's not in the scope,
but this won't succeed if we don't have funding sorted out.
This to my memory, has been a, a problem for all my career,
uh, possibly from 1968 legislation,
but certainly 1974, the fact
that we have 6,000 buildings on the list now, hopefully down
to 3000 soon,
we've still gotta find a way of making it happen.
I think a lot of what's happened in the, in recent times,
we're saving risk dollars basically from different pockets
than those which need to be dipped into to fix 'em.
So if we don't find the funding to deal with this somewhere,
then it won't happen.
Uh, and that's been the experience in the US that, um,
the major obstacle to to anything happening was always that.
And so summary, we're very supportive of the principles.
We do think there's some things that, um, could be improved.
Question for me, um, which is just you, you mentioned
that Auckland is still halfway, I think,
which used halfway across California.
So can you just sort of walk us through Yes.
Where our low risk areas, Auckland,
Auckland proposed low risk areas?
Auckland. Auckland, we'll leave the chathams out, um,
but you know where they fit.
How do, when you say halfway across
California, what does that mean?
What I'm saying there is that the, um,
if you look at this level of seismicity, it's equivalent to,
and, and you think of the west coast of the US
as being the highest seismic zone.
Yes. Drops off as you get away from it.
Then basically New Zealand Auckland,
the lowest seismic zones in New Zealand have got equivalent
seismicity about halfway across California,
which is still regarded as as high size se
Oh, so halfway from the coast inland.
Yeah. Right. So we're not,
we're not talking San Andrea's fault, we're talking, um,
something that's still fairly high seismic city,
Very similar, um,
geologically you've got the major fault line San Andreas or,
or yeah, or Alpine fault for example.
But all the other pattern
of Criss-crossing fault you get coming away from that,
but still active and still.
So, so that was one illustration.
You've got any other illustrations of where we fit?
We've got a lot of high seismic zones around the world
where, where our low seismic zones fit with.
You know, I'm, I'm thinking of places like, you know,
some bits of China, some bits of Turkey, Japan,
you know, those sort of areas.
Interesting question. I do. You can prepare
for, um, I mean if you
Well raised the issue and I thought, oh gosh, we should,
Yeah, yeah. If you look
around what's known as the room of fire, you see
where those, the earthquake zones are.
You know, we are very similar to Japan, for example.
Plates have come together and pushed
island up out of the sea.
That's how we got to be created. That's where we are.
So we're very similar to that. We're not similar,
those large continental regions where you've got sort
of random earthquakes happen, uh, within the plate where,
where a plate of boundary problem.
Okay. So forth. So,
Yeah. Um, just coming
back to the funding
and issue, it's obviously a reason why, um,
some new buildings are not being redeveloped, uh, given
that, you know, places like Dunedin, other parts
of the country which are not experiencing the same demand
and growth, the floor space and mm-hmm.
You know, uh, revenue per square meter
or say Oakland might be, uh, how do you see
that being resolved if somebody's forced to, or,
or must carry out seismic strengthening,
but there's no actual way to recover that economically?
Well, I think there's two things we need to do.
One of them, which I've touched on, is that we need
to make sure we simplify the systems
by which people can upgrade these fluid
so it becomes more affordable.
Um, I mean, you know, if you think about the worst
of the worst, which are the unreinforced, most buildings,
they don't need major structural interventions.
They just need to be tied together.
You should take the structural engineering out of it,
get it back to something which is simply done.
That's the first part of it.
The second part of it is, okay,
what are the mechanisms of funding?
And I agree with you that you know,
who owns the building, who pays for it?
There's gotta be a relativity there.
Um, mechanisms I've seen that do work have been things like
tax relief, which she's referred to a minute ago.
Allowing different methods for bid, for depreciation
or for other banks, um,
and potentially looking at low interest loans.
So, I mean, these are the things which I've seen tried in
America with some success here.
I think if we just keep on pushing the table across
to people with no money,
they're just gonna keep pushing it back.
Okay. Thank you. Really appreciate that. Okay.
And now we've got, uh, the Diocese of Wellington.
So welcome.
So you've got a handle on the, on the, uh,
process. And I'll, um, get
The clock started now and the way we go.
Thank you,
Koto.
I'm Stuart Goodin. I am the thicker of St.
Peters and Palmerston North,
but also a member of our diocese and board of trustees.
I'm joined here on my left by Ben Pringle, our Esan manager,
and on my right by the venerable guy Benton, who is figure
of Saints,
Wellington Diocese manages one of the largest
and most diverse portfolios
of buildings in the lower North island,
covering over a hundred communities
with more than 270 buildings across 167 sites.
And these range from newly built community housing units
through to churches built in the 1860s.
We also consider our submission
and situation to be representative
of our fellow diocese across ALT
and indeed of other denominations.
In spite of our large asset base, many
of our assets are non fungible.
They're tied to local parish community expectations
and historic trust implications
and financial assets are also tied to specific purposes,
which makes it very challenging
to realize financial assets required to do building work.
Many of our buildings serve as sacred spaces,
providing people with places of refuge,
but they play a much broader role serving their local
communities by facilitating education, service provision,
for example, food distribution, distribution,
social support, civil defense, public events,
and cultural functions.
The EPB system is currently designed to shape the life
of these communities for a decade,
and this bill is an opportunity to reset the relationship
across our diocese.
We have broad experience working within the current
legislation with territorial
authorities, engineers, and so on.
At present, we have 25 earthquake Pro buildings,
considerably more have already been strengthened.
Some probably needlessly from a life safety perspective
and others have not been strengthened
where there have been significant difficulties
of cost or roadblocks.
We feel that systems should focus on actual exposure to risk
and life safety outcomes
and not proxies for those things
that inadvertently capture low risk buildings.
And this principle underlies four key points
of our submission, that urban center definitions must
reflect real pedestrian and traffic exposure.
For example, story definitions must reflect real building
height and occupancy, not architectural quirks.
Seismic methodologies must be nationally consistent,
so risk is assessed in the same way in
every territorial authority.
And consenting pathways
and heritage considerations must not create barriers
that do not meaningfully improve safety in relation
to the urban center definition, in one 30 3D clause seven,
further review has revealed
that our written submission was wrong,
and it on page two, we expressed concern
that urban center is not clearly defined.
Officer, thank, thank you for that.
We now appreciate that it is clearly defined,
but our issue is with that definition
that it is far too wide, especially if the focus
of the bill is life safety.
A little work example will illustrate the point either
handout to share.
So the bill is drafted,
relies on the stats New Zealand functional urban areas
classification, uh,
and the included classifications amount to approximately 84%
of the 2018 New Zealand usual, usually resident population.
Um, as is referenced in that, um, the, the document
that's, uh, referred to.
And so to take as an example, one I'm familiar with St.
Oswald's Church, which is located at the junction
of state Highway three in western line in Westmere.
Nui appears to fall within the Bill's definition
of urban center being part of the nui functional urban area.
And Nui is classified as a large regional center.
No triangle on that first page
represents an approximate location of St.
Oswald superimposed on what appears
to be the stats nz boundary definition of the
nui functional urban area.
If you turn over, you'll see that.
Uh, so Oswalds has pictured there.
It's a recently strengthened unreinforced masonry building
standing isolated in park-like
surroundings in a rural setting.
Very pretty. And that is beautiful, beautiful, uh,
illustrated in the satellite picture on the,
on the last page there.
So as set out on submission, we believe
that the focus should, should be on actual risk exposure
matters such as pedestrian volumes,
traffic volumes, and the like.
And the urban center definition
and its application should follow that.
Regarding the story definitions, again, we assume
that it's the life safety concern that gives rise
to the three story threshold.
And we assume that this is to do with the risk
of buildings pancaking
and harming occupants without a practical definition
of what a story is.
The bill risks capturing tall structures
that do not present at risk further, it's essential
that whatever is determined to be targeted retrofit
in clause one 30 3D
for such buildings addresses the life safety issue
that leads to these tall buildings being included
and does not extend to extraneous,
but costly additions that arise simply
because the building has been captured under the definition
on our pass to being to
Continue. Thank you Stuart.
We wanna emphasize the social cost
of unnecessary closure.
And we've had many examples of
that in recent decades when a church
or a hall closes, we strongly believe that
that community loses, uh, more than a building.
Uh, it's a third space, it's a space where services and,
and the community life functions.
Uh, and we also, uh, strongly believe that it's, uh,
a disproportionate impact on vulnerable communities within
that wider community who feel that impact
that strongest or the hardest.
And so we argue that a risk proportionate EPB system is
therefore also just under formula there.
Thank you. We think that national consistency is essential
and our basis, we have 15 different territorial authorities.
And so inconsistency is our lived reality.
We've undertaken dozens
of earthquake strengthening projects across different
councils, uh, with wildly different outcomes based on where
that building may be based on, uh,
specific council involvement
and their interpretation of the building act.
And then furthermore, uh, each
territorial authority has its own bylaws for,
uh, heritage assets.
Uh, and I recognize there are not one
but two, uh, former Wellington City mayors.
In this, uh, in the select committee, uh,
we have 53 heritage assets, uh, of which five are also ebbs.
Uh, and guy will talk to one of those, um, shortly.
Uh, we also think that, um, uh, the need
for an appeal mechanism, um, the absence of that, uh,
makes the, uh, assessment of ebbs in the first instance,
vital, uh, as well as having, uh, uh, consistency guidance
for territorial authorities, uh, once, uh,
con consenting has happened.
Lastly, it's really important to recognize the wider reforms
that are also, uh, being progressed or talked about.
This bill cannot operate in isolation.
We, uh, we strongly stress the alignment, the need
for alignment with heritage reform, planning reform,
and the health and safety reform.
Uh, and that without alignment,
building orders could face contradictory obligations.
A well-designed EPB system therefore protects life
and protects the places where life happens
As the vicar of a local, um, Anglican church,
which is part of a movement
of transformative local faith communities.
We have a building that was built in 1927 Edwardian Gothic
style built of red brick slate roof.
It's traditional logistical plan,
chance church building sanctuary belt tower.
As per the picture, uh, it's lovely Frederick jersey
to clerk owing to his architectural fame.
It is now a category two
historic place on both the National Heritage Listing
and also the Wellington City Council.
Heritage listing Earthquake strength
and Restrengthening work was undertaken in the
1960s way before me.
The project strengthened the church's structure
by installing steel braces connected to the piles,
adding steel chances to the tire to tie the walls together,
and setting timber roof
bracing despite the restrengthening work,
the buildings Red Stickered in 2018, again,
before me following the Kaikora earthquake,
when a seismic assessment determined
that the building was only 15% NBS,
it remains shuttered nearly a decade on
with Restrengthening work, which at present must adhere
to the strict heritage requirements estimated
to cost us anywhere between 5 million and $10 million.
We are a local faith community of about 150
or so people at which such a cost is completely
beyond our financial capacity.
We have an, we have engaged in initial discussions
with several seismic engineers
and with our parish over several sessions
to identify creative restrengthening solutions
that would see us radically reimagine the build buildings
form and reimagine the building while holding onto some
of the iconic architecture that's so loved
by people which could be achieved at a significantly reduced
cost, if not for the current heritage constraints,
which would prevent us from pursuing such a solution.
It would also enable us to entirely reimagine the site.
For instance, the opportunity to keep
or not to keep the church engaging community spaces in
developing affordable housing and social services.
We are fortunate to have a modern hall immediately adjacent
to our shuttered church, which enable us to, to be present
to our local community functioning church would help broaden
the range of community facing
services that our parish offers.
And Simon, to your point,
recouping the cost economically would be absolutely
unattainable as it currently stands,
in which case we support the bill
because we would be able to then dream of
what could be and how,
How good. And you have
used every second of your time on the bar.
And for the record, can we name on behalf
of the American Church that the clerk
of the committee has a fantastic mustache.
Thank you very much. That's gonna form part of the, uh,
well, we'll, we'll make sure that that particular, um,
endorsement, uh, makes it into the, uh, record.
Thank you very much. Thanks. Cheers.
Lining you up for, uh, roll of the clergy.
I was wondering that a qualifying matter. That's it. Okay.
And thank you. Um, our last, uh, submitter is cwell.
I've never seen a blush
Like that.
Oh, I, I have pro to that aren't John Little
Bit. Yeah, yeah.
Right. Yeah. And we, we, we,
we don't bring abuse that staff.
Okay. Right. Lovely to see you both here
and, um, you know, the, uh, the, the drill.
So, um, last in your hands,
Right? I'm Doug Martin,
the chair of Cover world, Geraldine's, part
of the Cover World team and also part of the city.
Well, as I'm sure you know, uh, also relevant to this is
that I was Crown Manager out the Christchurch from
Christchurch City Council, rather particularly left its, uh,
ation as building consent authority
just after the earthquake.
Um, so I've got a perspective on some of this, um,
which is rooted in that.
Um, just two, three brief points.
Um, firstly, uh, cover well was really set up
and this is the strictly rid of the bill was really set up,
um, in order to provide, if you like, affordable Insurance
solutions for not even Central City departs.
That's what it was set up.
Um, in re basically we, in response to the exponential rise
of insurance costs that occurred over the last few years,
but also, um, the will they
or won't they insure issue, which I actually confronted
as a body corporate chair from time to time.
So there was a kind of a, what I would say, a lack
of loyalty, uh, from some of the insurance providers
to ensuring in city apartments.
Um, we support this bill.
I mean, I think it's a, it's a pragmatic response to
the re overkill that inevitably happens after a major event.
And which I observed when I was down at
Christchurch at the time.
There's two or three points I just wanna make firstly.
Um, if you look at the cover, well, um, portfolio,
it's largely comprised of apartments which
have a very high MPS rating.
They're up 90% or plus,
but the insurance costs are still very high.
In other words, there hasn't really been, um,
any recognition of the resilience of those buildings,
um, by insurers.
Uh, so volume has been damned, if you like,
by the, by the same blanket.
The second thing I'd um, mention is, is in,
in a city Wellington raise this point is
that there are still quite a number of, um,
multi-unit department blocks that all within the EBS system.
Um, I, I basically invite the committee to say why,
to ask why, I mean why they include residential
departments within the EBS system.
In any case, I think it's always worth asking
that basic question.
Um, if the answer to that is yes, there are good reasons
to include, uh, blocks within EBS system,
then how do you actually encourage owners to
remediate those buildings when the costs are often
quite disproportionate?
So I listen with interest
to your comments about Dun need City Council and,
and other submissions about buildings of heritage value.
I would argue that is actually trickier again, um, um,
'cause of the costs fall on an individual owner,
particularly in a multiunit uh, setting.
So I think it's worth asking that basic question,
why include what's the major risk and what is
and is this proportional, right?
So I think it's worth asking that question
'cause I'm by no means should have convinced myself that.
Um, the last point I wanna make,
and I'll hand over Geraldine, is around the Unit Titles Act
and we've been banging our head against the brick wall on
this issue and there is a group that's been set up
who I think will be being a submission.
Um, not, not to this, not to this group,
but alright, so if you're talking about incentivizing, um,
owners and body unit departments to remediate
unit titles Act is actually quite a major constraint around
that because the insurance provisions in
that act have been described by various
legal people as a dog.
And basically they limit the capacity
or the ability of body corporates to actually structure
their insurance arrangements relative to the risk of their,
um, that they're confronting.
Um, so it's a, it's kind of a technical I issue.
It's hard to get traction on,
but the fix is actually quite easy
and could be, um, accommodated within this bill.
Um, basically what the, um, unit title is at, well,
it creates a lot of confusion,
but it's been interpreted in the industry as meaning
that full insurable value, which is the, is the term
and the act as meaning full replacement costs.
But of course we'll never get that.
If you, if something really bad happens, you never get that.
So you end up paying a premium that is based on a, a level
of cover that you'll never actually realize
if something really bad happens.
So that, so that, look, that's all I want to say is Simon,
did you wanna you finish later?
I'll wait through the chair. I'll pass over to Gerald. Okay.
Geraldine, we've got about four
and a half minutes left, so, okay.
Um, yeah, so I think in
Terms of, um, just following on from what Doug is saying,
the, I would just sort of talk about the specific NBS
and its relationship to insurance
and that it's never, as Doug mentioned, it's never
explicitly shown to result in, in a reduction,
even though insurers will ask for it, um, when they want,
you want your, um, information about your building.
And I think we've, um,
in our submission there highlighted the need to,
for this bill to make it really clear
that percentage MBS cannot continue to be used as a,
by insurers and valuers and bankers
and, you know, for a proxy
for building resilience when it's no longer being used
for the earthquake prone system, which is what,
what's intended, what, what it was set up for in terms
of percentage mb new, new, new, new building standard.
So, you know, I think we, that's an important thing is
to get that clear in the bill.
And I think in discussions with officials, they've said
that, you know, they can't stop people using it,
but I think that, you know, we can make it very explicit.
Legislation does have for the avoidance of doubt, you know,
the, the government is not using this percentage NBS
for anything to do with lifesaving
and it should not be used for requiring, um, building owners
to provide them with information about the percentage MBS if
it's not being used for any other purpose
to do as earthquake prone.
That's interesting. And I think we, we do support, um,
the development of a suitable proposed, you know, pur Yeah.
Suitable purpose built measure for building resilience if
that's what's needed to really get
appropriate insurance cover, you know, for a building.
And we think there should be further research done on that.
Um, like see that led by Natural Hazards Commission
and I listened to the submission from the Insurance Council
of New Zealand talking about the repair standard, um,
in terms of for existing buildings
and I was sort of unclear as to
how such a standard would work in practice
and particularly, you know,
how it would be retrospectively applied
to existing buildings.
And what, what are the implications for owners of, um,
you know, of, of a standard being developed by a group
that's sort of sitting outside any legislative framework
and you know, a standard is sort of implication
that it's mandatory or has some sort of, you know, threshold
and what happens if building owners of existing buildings,
what of existing buildings don't meet that standard
that's currently that's being developed?
You know, buildings aren't designed, you know,
I think the insurance council referred to
car repair manuals.
I don't think that's really good analogy
because most, you know, some prefab buildings might be
designed to a specific standard, but apartment buildings
and most other buildings are not
provided designed to a standard.
So you don't have repair models for buildings
as you can do for cars.
So I think we are interested to see in knowing
how this develops, but a concern
that any standard being brought in
and how it could be applied retrospectively
to existing buildings.
Um, and we'd encourage the development of a purpose-built,
um, measure that will consider the implications
for all parties in that development.
Not just taking it from the insurer's perspective,
which seems to be where that was going. So
Yeah. Thank you. Thank
you both. We've got about
a minute, uh, there.
Simon, do you want to take a, a question?
Probably only have time for one. Oh
Yeah. Just coming back to this
issue
with the unit titles act Sure.
And insurers insurance of for, for uh,
residential department buildings.
Do you think an option could be, uh, for the insured parties
to, to seek an agreed value as opposed to having to,
to go for the um, full replacement?
Um, yes. Yes.
That would certainly be what we would be advocating is
using this bill to actually
clarify those provisions in the unit titles act.
And then I think your option emerges if you've got the
flexibility, the less than the flexibility to do it.
Okay. And we've had a, um, part of the group is a, is part
of inter council who has crafted very elegant
and simple solution to it.
Okay. Um, it's almost like it's back to another era
of the unit titles act like tied quite
paternalistic in a way.
It's assuming the body corporates dunno which way up on
they have to be told how to ensure we don't.
Sure. Thank you. Right.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate it. Always good.
See you. Right.
Um, officials, we are gonna see you again on Monday.
We've got a number of submissions still to finish off.
There's quite a few things that you've been raised.
Um, I think.